[Previous Chapter](../Ch37-systemsusd/notes_Ch37.md) - [Table of Contents](../README.md#table-of-contents) - [Next Chapter](../Ch39-init/notes_Ch39.md)

---

# Chapter 38 GRUB - Notes

## 38.2 Introduction
A system that can not start up on its own is rather useless. Linux systems have a lot of flexibility in how they boot. Possible to choose between different kernel versions or options, or even different operating systems in multiple-boot scenarios. Most non-embedded systems use the Grand Unified Boot Loader to accomplish the first steps of a successful system initialization. GRUB also has interactive capabilities as well as a secure password facility.

## 38.3 Learning Objectives:
- Explain what the role of GRUB is.
- Understand the differences between the GRUB 1 and GRUB 2 versions.
- Explain the interactive selections you can make at boot.
- Install GRUB.
- Explain how the configuration files that GRUB needs are used and modified.

## 38.4 What is GRUB?
Virtually, all x86-based Linux systems (outside the embedded sphere) today use GRUB (<strong>GR</strong>and <strong>U</strong>nified <strong>B</strong>ootloader) to handle early phases of system startup. Other platforms may have other equivalents, such as ELILO used on EFI systems such as IA64 (Itanium), and Das U-BOOT used on many embedded configurations.

Some important features of GRUB are:
- Alternative operating systems can be chosen at boot time.
- Alternative kernels and/or initial ramdisks can be chose at boot time for a given operating system.
- Boot parameters can be easily changed at boot time without having to edit configuration files, etc. in advance.

GRUB Version 2 has replaced Version 1 on all major Linux distributions, except for RHEL 6-based ones. While the details are different between versions, basic philosophy is the same. Thus, will concentrate almost exclusively on Version 2.

At boot, basic configuration file is read, either `/boot/grub/grub.cfg` or `/boot/grub2/grub.cfg`, depending on distribution.

This file is auto-generated by **update-grub** (or **grub2-mkconfig** on RHEL 7) based on configuration files in the `/etc/grub.d` directory and on `/etc/default/grub` and should never be edited by hand. Usually, these utilities are run from other distribution-supplied scrips used for updating or compiling Linux kernels.

For either version, relevant essential configuration file contains some global parameters and then a stanza for each operating system or kernel configured.

## 38.5 Interactive Selections with GRUB at Boot
Upon system boot, after the initial POST and BIOS stages, GRUB will be entered and will display a menu. This may or may not have graphics in it (at least for the background splash screen).

Menu contains list of bootable images from one or more Linux distributions or operating systems. There may also be submenus with even more choices.

Using up and down arrows and the **Enter** key, can select the right boot option, or can wait for a configurable time period before the default choice is entered.

However, can do much more. After selecting an entry, can type **e** for edit, and then enter into interactive shell. In this shell, can alter the **stanza** in the configuration file that describes the particular boot option. Usually, do this to alter the **kernel command line**; eg., adding the word **single** at the end of the command line will cause system to boot in single user mode in order to take corrective action. Once desired change is made, can hit the right key to make the system boot.

At bottom of screen, will see displayed information on the exact key strokes, so there is no need to memorize.

Note: any changes made to configuration are **not persistent** and will be lost on next boot. So, for permanent change, need to change the actual files on the machine, using the right utilities.

Also possible to enter a pure shell, rather than edit a particular **stanza**. Can run a number of different commands and even try to re-install or repair GRUB. If there are serious problems, like not being able to find a configuration file, GRUB reverts back to this command line mode and you may be able to rescue the system without resorting to rescue media.

##

[Back to top](#)

---

[Previous Chapter](../Ch37-systemsusd/notes_Ch37.md) - [Table of Contents](../README.md#table-of-contents) - [Next Chapter](../Ch39-init/notes_Ch39.md)
